It's now time for a very cool lecture
and one that I'm really excited about
because we're gonna talk about
how to implement CSS animations.
So, as I said, you're gonna learn in this lecture
how to create CSS animations using the keyframes at-rule
and the animation property.
So what we're trying to do
is this animation that we're gonna see here.
So watch carefully at these two parts here,
or H1 element.
So this one fades in,
and it also moves in from the right side here.
Right?
And this one moves in from the left side
and it also fades in.
So let's take a look again.
So, that's it.
This one fades from the left,
and this one fades in from the right.
So let's code these animations in CSS.
And it's really cool, believe me.
Now there are generally two types of animations in CSS.
The first one, which is also the easier one,
is to just use the transition property,
and then change the properties
that you want to animate on an event,
like when we hover the element.
And I'm sure that you're familiar with this method,
and if not, don't worry
because we're gonna use in the next lecture.
But what we're doing in this lecture is a bit different
and actually a bit more advanced and cooler.
Because these animations allow us to put more options
and so they are a bit more complex.
So let me show you how it works.
So we start by creating an animation
that looks exactly like we want it to be.
And in order to do that, we use the keyframes at-rule.
So we write @keyframes,
@keyframes, and then we give the animation a name.
And we're gonna start with the first part
so, the heading primary main.
Which remember, moves in from the left.
So I'm gonna call this animation moveInLeft.
Okay.
And now in here, I can specify what I want to happen
in each moment of time of the animation.
So we start with 0% which is before
the animation actually starts.
So this can also be called start.
Then the finish is at 100%,
which is when the animation finishes.
But we can put other steps here in the middle.
So for example, if we want something to happen
at the moment where the animation is at 80%, for example,
and we could do 50, we could do 36,
we could do any percentage here that we want.
But let's just start with 0%, so the initial state,
and then 100%, which is the final state.
So how do we want the element to look like
before it starts to move in?
First, we want it to be invisible.
Right?
So what we can do is opacity zero.
So at the beginning of our animation,
the opacity will be zero and at the end of course,
we want it to be back to one.
So opacity, one.
So that's one of the properties that we're animating here.
Now for the browser performance,
it's best to only ever animate two different properties.
One is opacity, which is the one that we're using here,
and the other one is the transform property.
That's what the browsers are optimized for,
for these two properties.
But with transform, we can do a whole lot.
And so it's everything that we need actually
to make all these cool animations that you can imagine.
So remember that the element comes in from the left.
So where do we want it to be in the beginning,
before the animation actually starts?
We want it to be more on the left than in the beginning.
Right?
And so we can use
transform
and then translateX.
And why x?
Well, because we want it to animate in the x-direction.
So remember, the x-direction is like this,
go from left to right,
and the y-direction, or axis,
goes from the top to the bottom.
So we want to translate it in the x-direction,
and we want it to be more on the left than in the beginning.
And so it's a negative value.
So let's say 100 pixels minus.
Okay?
Because, remember that the direction goes
from left to right.
So a positive value means it goes to the right,
and negative value means it goes to the left.
So just like in basic mathematics.
Alright, but moving back here.
How do we want it to be when we are at 100%?
We simply want it to look the way that it looks now, right?
And so we say translate
zero.
And why zero?
Well because, if we translate at zero,
then it's gonna look exactly the way
that it looks right now.
Make sense?
So this is the very basic animation just with the initial
and the final state.
So let's now actually apply this animation.
And so for an animation to work,
there are only two properties
that we have to really specify.
Which are called animation-name,
so animation-name which is the name
of the animation we just wrote.
And so it's moveInLeft
moveInLeft
and then the animation duration.
Okay,
animation-duration.
And so this the time that the animation should take.
Just to see it in the beginning, let's put three seconds
so it takes a longer time
so we can see if it's actually working.
We can actually put five seconds
and it takes even a bit longer.
So these are the only properties that are required
for an animation to work.
Now, there are a lot more properties,
but I'm gonna show them to you in a second.
Now let's just see if this actually works.
And so we need to reload our page now.
And yeah, you see? It's working. Great!
Amazing, right?
This is really fantastic, so let me play it again.
So it's happening really slow because we
specified it for five seconds but we can then change that.
Now let me play the original one again.
And you see that in this version it actually first goes
a bit in that direction and then it moves back, right?
Let me play it again.
So it's this, this small movement in this direction.
So how do you think we are going to do that?
What do you think?
And that's right, we're going to use this 80% here.
So what we can say here is that we want it to be
at this point, translateX to be
20 pixels, for example.
Because remember if we're specifying a positive value here
it will go to the right side.
So the final position is zero,
the initial position is a lot more to the left,
and then this intermediate position, let's say,
is a bit more to the right.
So let's check it out.
And yeah, nice! That's really nice.
Let's just put it a bit slower now that we have
this animation really going on already.
So just in one second.
Alright. Maybe that's a bit too much.
I will leave it just at ten pixels.
Great. So this already works.
Now I told you that there are other properties
for animations that we can also specify as.
So let's take a look at them.
The first one is that we can set a delay.
So animation-delay, let's say three seconds
and so now before this animation starts to play,
it will first wait three seconds.
So let's take a look.
Alright, so here we go.
So it waited three seconds. So one, two, three,
and there it goes.
Okay, so that's the animation delay.
Now we can also do something else,
I'm actually going to comment out
this part that we don't want,
because this is just to show you
but I will not delete it so that you can still see it
because it's properties can be very useful sometimes.
Okay. Another one that we can do is an animation count,
animation-iteration-count.
So if we set this to, let's say, three,
then the animation will simply happen three times.
So let's check that out as well.
So one, two, three.
Okay?
But we also don't want this one to happen
so I'm putting it here in the commented code.
And then one that is actually quite important
which is the animation-timing-function.
So this is a function which defines
how the animation will proceed.
So, how fast or how slow these parameters
that we specified here happen over time.
And there are different built-in animation functions
for example, ease-out, so ease-out for example.
Let's take a look at it now.
Probably gonna look a bit similar,
but they are different timing functions.
So I already have this one here open.
So we have ease, ease-in, ease-out,
and then all of these built-in animation timing functions.
So for example with the ease-in function,
the animation will start slower
and then accelerate over time.
And with ease-out, it's the opposite.
So it will start faster
and then it will become slower by the end.
So this might sound a bit complicated
but we're gonna look at animation timing functions
again in another lecture.
We're also going to look at this cubic-bezier function here
which basically allows us to write a custom function.
So a custom timing function different from
these predefined functions.
And this can actually make all the difference
in how the animation feels to the user.
So we used, remember, ease-out.
So let's play it again.
And this is how ease-in, for example, looks like.
So it was slower towards the beginning,
and then faster at the end. See?
So at the end it happened a lot faster.
So let's stick with ease-out like we had at the beginning.
Okay, and these are the most essential animation properties.
There are actually more,
but they are not really so important.
We can take a look at them if you're really interested.
So this is the moveInLeft animation
but we can now also build the moveInRight.
So let's just copy this part of the code
and call it moveInRight.
So, how do you think this one will look like?
So I want you to pause the video now
and try to change these values here
so that the animation instead of going in from the left,
it goes in from the right.
So take a second and try that out.
Alright, did you manage to do it?
Well let's see.
What do you think is the most logical way of doing it?
So all we have to do, is to actually remove this minus here,
and put it here.
And why is that?
Because as I mentioned, this 100 pixels here,
if it's a plus value, it moves the element to the right.
Because it goes forward in the x-direction.
And so it's the opposite as we had before,
and then the same thing, of course, here.
Because now we want it to move a little bit to the left,
before it goes back to it's original position at zero.
Right?
Okay. So now all we have to do is to add it here.
Now instead of specifying all of
these properties here one-by-one,
animation-name, duration, timing-function, delay, et cetera,
we can simply use the shortened property
and just say animation.
And so you can put all of these together,
and then CSS will figure out what means what.
So moveInRight over the duration of one second,
and with the ease-out function.
And that should work now.
So let's take a look.
And, yep! So it's exactly what we had before.
Great.
Now maybe you have already noticing that here in the end,
take a look here at this text,
right before the animation ends you will probably
see a little shake here, okay?
So let's take a close look at the end.
There it was.
So it moved a little bit like to the top.
Did you see it?
Let's take a look again.
So you saw it moving? So it moved a little bit,
so it's a bit shaky,
and sometimes this happens in animations.
And to be honest,
no one really knows actually why this happens,
but we, actually, we have a fix for this.
So there is something that we can do
and what we have to do in this case,
is to simply declare the backface-visibility property,
backface-visibility, and set it to hidden.
So the entire heading-primary element
because you see actually this entire element
is what moves on this animation.
So it's a bit shaky,
and its the entire heading-primary element.
This backface-visibility property determines
if the back part of the element when we transform it
is visible or hidden for the user.
So imagine we have an element and we rotate it 180 degrees.
So it would be logical that we then see the back part
of that element, right?
But if we use backface-visibility hidden,
then that back part,
so that part that's behind the element, let's say,
that part actually gets hidden.
Now in this case,
we're not rotating anything,
we're not doing anything like that
but we still use this fix here,
like this hack in order to fix this little shaking
that we see in the animation.
And again,
no one really seems to know why the shaking happens
and why this fixes it, but as long as it works, it's okay.
And so now, let's take a look at it again
and look really closely here, really close.
And it's gone, right?
It's no longer shaking
and everything appears to be working just fine.
And so yeah, that's how animations work.
So this is a really powerful thing.
And we could actually go really crazy with this.
Imagine we would do something like put a 60% here
and say transform at this point should be rotate,
let's say, just something like 120 degrees.
So degree is a unit we use for rotations.
And we can also say that in the beginning it should be
rotate
minus 50 degrees.
So just some random numbers here to try out
to see what happens. Okay?
Not really sure how it's gonna look like.
So it's this crazy thing, you see?
Let me play it again to you.
So this is just something crazy just to show you
the power that we have here with these animations.
To make it a bit more realistic,
let's say we rotate it 360 degrees.
Well that didn't really work, but let's try 180 degrees.
Now it should do something.
Yeah.
So it starts just right, and it rotates until 70% I believe,
or was it, oh yeah 60%
and then it went back to the initial position
because we didn't specify anything here.
We could actually put this one here as well.
So we're just playing around here with the numbers,
you don't really have to follow this.
I just wanted to show you that there's not really a limit.
So this actually looks the same,
let me try it again.
180 this time,
and,
well I guess it didn't work exactly
because we have to put it here in this step as well.
So let's put here as well just to play around a little bit.
And here we go. Let me close this one,
and of course, delete this little thing that we did here.
Because this is just like we want it to be.
You saw I selected two things at the same time.
You saw that?
I'm sure you can do that as well in your code editor
and sometimes it's really handy.
So for example, I have this transform.
If I wanna select the next one, I just have to hit Command+D
here in this Visual Studio code
but the same thing works in Atom or Brackets, or whatever.
So if I just hit Command+D, and D, and D,
then I have all of these transforms selected
and you see that the cursor is blinking here
and so then I can delete,
and I can write something else if I want,
and it's happening in all these places at the same time.
Alright?
So this is not really CSS,
but it's a nice trick that you can use in your text editor.
Also, I can put multiple cursors just by clicking it
then hitting Command, or Control maybe on Windows
and then just keep clicking and it will add multiple cursors
all over the place.
You see, like this.
And now if I start writing A-B-C,
it's writing A-B-C everywhere.
So in this case, not really useful but you can do it.
And sometimes it's pretty useful
like to change multiple things at the same time, okay?
And since we're talking about text editors,
I'm sure that yours also has this functionality here
which is called Minimap,
which shows us a very small version of our code.
So we can use this to drive around in our code,
or to move around.
So imagine we wanna go to the beginning
and then we just need to click here,
and then it goes exactly wherever you want to.
Or, imagine that I'm working here
and I want to go to the animations
and here I can see that these here look like the animations
and I just have to click here
and then I'm here at the place where I wrote the animations.
So instead of scrolling all the way up and down,
imagine we have 500 lines of CSS
then this becomes really useful.
And so once again, this is also in your code editor,
you just have to turn it on
if it's not turned on by default.
Only if you like it, of course.
But I think it's pretty helpful sometimes.
Okay, and that was the goal that I had for this lecture.
So I showed you how animations work
with the keyframes at-rule,
and I showed you that we can build
really complex animations with this.
Oh, but before we stop,
I can actually show you something else
which is, imagine that we don't just want this to happen
when we reload the page.
So imagine we want this to happen, this animation to happen
when we hover, for example, something.
So let's say we want this animation to happen to the logo
when I hover it.
So let's say, logo
hover,
and so you see I can actually use this animation here
in multiple places.
So I can just define moveInRight in one place
and then use it all over the place. Okay?
And so now this will only happen as soon as they hover.
So let's reload this
and here we go.
You see? There it is again.
So, this animation does not only have to happen
with the page load like we have these ones here,
see these ones are on page load, but this one is on hover.
Okay well this was just to show you,
we don't really want it to be here, right?
Okay, but this was now really all I had
to show you for this lecture.
So let's now move on to the next video. See you there.